---
layout: post
title: Revisiting the 401k
date: '2013-01-07T16:11:00-05:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: http://peterskim.tumblr.com/post/39924199653/revisiting-the-401k
---
The changing of the calendar is a good time to revisit personal finances. I’ve been aware of personal finance experts recommending maxing out your 401k if possible but I’ve always thought that was for “rich people”. I don’t know why it’s taken so long for me to realize this but it turns out that this is a great strategy even for people who aren’t super wealthy. In fact, those of us who aren’t “rich” might need to consider maxing out our 401k more than those who are because retirement is not going to be cheap and I don’t have a lot of confidence in the US government fixing Social Security, which will become insolvent by 2033 if nothing is done to fix it. Let’s take a look at this by example. The maximum per year contribution for 2013 is $17,500. If you get paid twice a month, that’d be $729.17 coming out of each paycheck. That sounds a bit tough to swallow until you consider the tax benefits of contributing to a 401k. Your 401k contributions reduce your taxable income, so if your gross income is $100,000, your actual taxable income will become $82,500 after making the max 401k contribution. Your taxable income will also be reduced by other factors such as your medical and transit FSA contributions, health insurance premiums, etc. Going back to the twice per month example, the reduction in your taxable income per paycheck works out to a net benefit of $182.29 in money you save on federal income taxes (assuming a 25% marginal tax rate) and an additional savings of about $72 if you live in a high tax state/city like me (NY state + NY city income tax). So what initially looked like a $729.17 reduction in each paycheck is actually only a $474 reduction in your take home pay. In the meantime, you’re socking away $17,500 per year, which after 20-30 years and a generally healthy stock market over the long term, should provide you with a decent retirement fund.

Another way to look at it is that you can either save 100% of that hard earned $17,500 for retirement or you can give 35% of it to the government for the pleasure of using 65% of that money now. The former sounds much more appealing to me.

Forgive my insensitivity if you aren’t in a position to put away anything close to $474 per paycheck towards retirement. It is still a lot of money and a tough pill to swallow, especially when finances seem hard as it is. Unfortunately, the reality is that there isn’t going to be a magic retirement fairy who will make up for us ignoring saving for retirement while we’re younger. Even if the politicians “fix” Social Security, it probably won’t look like what it does now since many people argue that it’s a flawed system to begin with — the payouts will likely be even smaller plus you’ll have to consider that health care costs will be higher thus reducing your disposable income even further. Even in the best case scenario, we will still have to find a way to supplement our retirement with our own savings.
