---
layout: post
title: Finding a new home
date: '2013-02-18T15:36:00-05:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: http://peterskim.tumblr.com/post/43424476196/finding-a-new-home
---
When we moved back from the DC area to NYC last year, things moved pretty quickly. I came up to NYC for a 3 day trip to find an apartment. Yes, you read that correctly — I only gave myself 3 days to look for an apartment in NYC. I ended up signing a lease on a place literally, a few minutes before I had to leave to catch my bus back to DC. Honestly, we can’t complain too much, especially when other folks in NYC have more challenging living situations. But we always knew we’d probably only be here a year.

That year has passed and we’ve started our apartment hunt in earnest. Our oldest son Raf is now almost 2 and a half years old. Pre-kindergarten starts at age 4 so he’ll be starting school in a year and a half. Crazy! Since we don’t want to move again in a year or two, we’re limiting our apartment search to areas where we’ll be in-zone for a highly rated school.

In western Queens, the consensus on best public elementary schools seems to be PS 122 in Astoria (Ditmars area) and PS 234 (Long Island City). I think both areas would be great for us in terms of not just the kids’ schooling but for us to be in a neighborhood that we enjoy — good restaurants, cafes, bakeries, etc., access to transportation, proximity to parks. The problem with Long Island City is that it’s become extremely expensive. The new high-rise buildings are way out of our price range and apartments in older buildings are almost impossible to get unless you’re really lucky with being in the right place at the right time. We’ve basically considered LIC an unrealistic possibility unless there’s a miracle.

That leaves the Ditmars area of Astoria as the other option, which is fine but the renters market is still pretty hot with units being snatched up pretty quickly once they hit the market. It’s a bit scary to limit the scope of our apartment search so much, so it seems like the prudent thing to do would be to be open to other options.

With regards to these “other” options, we’ve really been all over the place with our brainstorming. Must-haves are: decent in-zone elementary school, sufficient restaurants/cafes/bars in walking distance, less than 40 minute commute each way to midtown Manhattan and less than 50 minute commute to downtown Manhattan, and 2 BR apartments available for less than $2600. We’ve essentially narrowed it down to Astoria (Ditmars) and Greenpoint. All of Manhattan (south of 96th St or so) is too expensive unless we’re willing to live in a crappy apartment. Manhattan above 96th St. has poor schools. Bronx has poor schools except for maybe Riverdale but that commute is too long. Most of Brooklyn is too expensive (e.g. Park Slope, Brooklyn Heights, Williamsburg, Cobble Hill, Boerum Hill, Carroll Gardens). The only Brooklyn neighborhoods that somewhat meet our criteria are Greenpoint and Windsor Terrace — the commute from Windsor Terrace is a bit long though, so I’m ruling that out for now. Now back to Queens — we want to stay in western or central Queens. Eastern Queens has a lot of the better public schools in Queens but it’s too far. The only schools I’d feel comfortable sending my kids to in western or central Queens are the ones I mentioned previously — PS 122 and PS 234.

So this line of reasoning is how we’ve narrowed our apartment search to either Astoria (Ditmars) or Greenpoint. Greenpoint is a little bit more expensive than Astoria but it might be fun to try something new and different since we’ve lived in Astoria our entire time in NYC. I also happen to love Polish food and Greenpoint is a traditionally Polish neighborhood, though lately they’ve been getting a lot of spillover from Williamsburg of priced-out hipsters. People think that Greenpoint is out of the way because the only subway access it has is the G line which goes between Queens and Brooklyn. However, depending on where you live in Greenpoint, you can walk to the L train, which goes right into Manhattan along 14th St. There’s also the new East River Ferry that would take me to 34th St. It would also give me an excuse to do a multi-modal commute by biking to Vernon-Jackson on the 7 train or Bedford Ave on the L train.

Anyway, we’re still dependent on a lot of good luck and divine providence. An exciting and also uncertain time for us.
