---
layout: post
title: Finding new community in Hoboken
date: '2013-06-24T06:16:00-04:00'
tags:
- community
- Hoboken
tumblr_url: http://peterskim.tumblr.com/post/53748580162/finding-new-community-in-hoboken
---

When we were looking for a new apartment, we mostly focused on finding the neighborhood that would make the greatest improvement on our day-to-day quality of life within our budget. I believe this is in sharp contrast to the way a lot of other people approach finding a new home. A lot of people feel tied to their family and friends, which is completely understandable. There are a lot of good reasons to commit to living in close proximity to your family or current set of friends even if that means making sacrifices in your own quality of life but there are also other reasons (which I wouldn’t necessarily call “bad”) that can be driven by unhealthy/negative factors such as fear and guilt — I believe you should never make decisions based on fear or guilt.

In any case, there are a couple of reasons why relocating to a place where we literally don’t know anyone at all is not a scary thing for the Kim family.

First, I believe people long for community and friendship. Many adults (especially as they get past their 30s and 40s) have a difficult time forming new friendships. However, instead of getting frustrated and just falling back to leaning on your family and existing friends, I think it requires some degree of persistence and courage to continue reaching out to people you don’t know. When we moved to Alexandria, Virginia a couple of years ago, when we bumped into other people with young children in our apartment complex, we tried to make small talk and handed out our business cards (or in the wife’s case, her mommy card). Within just a few weeks, we had met about 10-12 families and organized weekly play dates for the entire group, along with a weekly music class. Even though we ended up only living there for 10 months, we still keep in touch with a few of those parents. We even flew out to Canada to visit one of them since their son and our older son, Raf, were best buddies. I specifically remember one of the moms being so thankful that I reached out to her in our club room — getting connected to other people in the same life stage changed her experience of living in that apartment complex.

Second, we are Christians and while this isn’t necessarily specific to religion, it is nice that we can really move anywhere and be able to connect with people who have the same set of beliefs and worldview. Sure, there are lots of different types of churches and it can be difficult finding one where we connect both on a theological and communal level but it’s better than nothing. Within a couple of weeks of moving to Hoboken, we started attending Hoboken Grace Community Church. After our experience of church in Astoria, we knew we wanted to attend a church that we could walk to and where most of the people at the church lived within walking distance — it makes such a huge difference in the community life of the church. There are two main evangelical churches in Hoboken: Hoboken Grace and Redeemer Hoboken. We chose Hoboken Grace because, let’s just say we’re not Presbyterian, or at least not in the PCA-way. I think Redeemer Hoboken would have been too conservative for us, not just in theology but also culture and vision. I’ve started attending a Dad’s small group and the wife started attending a women’s small group. Our older son Raf loves the kids’ program on Sundays and our younger son Matty is starting to get comfortable being left in the care of the nursery. It hasn’t even been two months since we moved to Hoboken and we feel fortunate to be a part of a church where we are more connected and involved than even the previous church we had attended for almost 4 years. 

Finding community is hard, especially as you get older. I’m finding it to be true that as we get older, we get more stubborn — we get more stuck to a certain set of values and mode of operation while being less tolerant of other people’s “quirks”. But I am hopeful that if we commit to being open to new relationships, open to allowing ourselves to change and accept people who are different from us, we don’t need to fear being alone and thus being stuck in undesirable situations. 
