---
layout: post
title: Home ownership
date: '2014-03-09T15:31:00-04:00'
tags:
- Hoboken
- homeownership
tumblr_url: http://peterskim.tumblr.com/post/79083393345/home-ownership
---

It’s been a while since I’ve written here. I’ve been so busy with starting a new job last November and closing on a home purchase in January, that I haven’t had time to write.

I’ve written a lot in the past about how home ownership is overrated, so it may seem as though I’m being hypocritical when writing about how people shouldn’t buy homes and then I go off and buy a home myself. 

I am obviously not anti-homeownership since I did recently choose to buy a home. My criticism of home ownership in the past has been targeted towards 1) American tax policy to promote home ownership over renting and 2) consideration of broader social and economic implications to a less mobile society. Now that I am a home owner, it’s hard for me to continue to oppose our country’s pro-homeownership tax policy, but I’ll do my best to stay true to my ideals instead of being purely self-interested. :)

The mortgage interest tax deduction is of greatest benefit to those in the middle and upper middle class (primarily the latter). A lot of poorer folks rent and do not benefit from the tax advantages to owning a home. Is that fair? Also, one can argue that the primary beneficiaries of the mortgage interest tax deduction are not home owners or home buyers but real estate agents who benefit from higher commissions from the inflated home prices that result from the tax policy. If the mortgage interest tax deduction didn’t exist, it would reduce demand for homes and naturally reduce home prices thus making it a wash in terms of affordability for the home buyer but reducing commissions for real estate agents. I still hope our political leaders can find a way to phase out the mortgage interest tax deduction.

My other major critique of home ownership is that it reduces labor mobility. We saw this during the recent recession where even if people were able to find a job or a better job in another city, they weren’t able to move due to their mortgages being underwater and not being able to sell their homes without taking a huge loss. As the child of a recent immigrant, I think this idea that we should be willing to relocate in order to pursue a better life (whatever that means to you) is important. There is a huge difference in our current economic reality compared to the past. Our ancestors (at least in America) were quite lucky in that America was blessed with many economic and political advantages that made life fairly stable and secure. Recent generations of workers were able to work for a single employer from the time they graduated high school to retirement and those employers often provided generous pensions to support retirement. This made it a trivial decision to buy a home and forgo labor mobility. This is not the reality of today’s economy. America is no longer as dominant of a force relative to other nations, we are primarily a service-oriented economy and the fastest growing jobs require higher levels of education. People actually need lower barriers to relocate to pursue better career opportunities. That’s tough when our tax policy incentivizes people to reduce labor mobility.

So why did I personally decide to buy? I love New York City and am very bullish on the NYC metro area. I was heart-broken by having to leave Astoria. We tried so hard to find a living situation that would work for us but in the end, we were priced out. The only way to avoid being priced out of a neighborhood is to buy since our mortgage payments would stay static with a fixed rate mortgage (only potential variability being in property taxes). We’ve come to love Hoboken and decided to take the plunge in settling down here (for now). And if we did have to move for work, I am confident that I’ll be able to rent it out without a problem. Hoboken is more walkable/bikeable, is closer to Manhattan and feels more sane than most outer borough NYC neighborhoods. There’s also the benefit of not having to pay the ~3.5% NYC income tax. It’s a bit lacking in ethnic food options (especially compared to Queens) but the Italian food here is second to none and there are enough yuppie coffee shops to make me happy. We’ve moved 4 times in the past 2 years and we’re excited to stay put for a little bit. 
